Joining me now is CNN military analyst colonel
Cedric Leighton. Colonel, thank you for your
time this morning. First off, I want to get your
reaction to secretary of state Antony blinken in
ramallah. He with was just there meeting with
Mahmoud abbas, the Palestinian authorities
president. What does that tell you, especially
that he is engaging once again in shuttle
diplomacy. Weighs at the summit Saturday meeting
with the foreign ministers of Egypt and Qatar and
Jordan. What do you make of of this?
>> Yeah, good morning, Amara. Well,
I think what secretary blinken is doing
is trying to shore up support among the
Palestinian authority as well as the Arab
nations for a two-state solution. He would
like the Palestinian authority also to take over
the administration of gaza once Israel achieves
its goals of destroying hamas. Whether or not
Israel can achieve the goals is, of course,
another matter. I think the goal of
the secretary of state is very much
[6:10:46 AM]
secretary of state is very much to get
the Palestinian authority represented by
Mahmoud abbas in on his side and make that
work for him from a political standpoint.
>> What are your thoughts on this four-hour window
for this safe corridor? That window is about to
close at 2:00 P.M. Local time. It's a little after
1:00 there. And Elia brought up these issues. How
do you get the messages to the civilians dealing
with power outages and internet outages in gaza,
and let's say they do get the message.
Of course, resources is a huge problem,
right, because no fuel, as we heard from the U.S.
Special envoy, David Satterfield, no new fuel has
gone into gaza since the war began. How helpful do
you think this safe corridor that idf is opening
will be for the civilians to move south?
>> I think it's too short a time period.
[6:11:47 AM]
period. Four hours is not enough time to get
people out, especially those that have special
needs or are in, you know, in a place where
they can't really get transportation. So far,
to my knowledge at least, we have not seen
a stream of refugees on foot marching down,
you know, the highway there. So Elliot is right.
If you don't have any internet connectivity,
if you don't have power, there is a risk that you
might not get that message. The Israelis have in
the past distributed flyers. They air dropped
flyers into the Palestinian areas to get them
that kind of a message. Whether or not they
did that in this case, I'm not sure. But they
are definitely -- the Israelis are definitely
trying several ways to get the message to them.
Thoblem that they have is it's not coordinated
with other aspects of their military operation
or doesn't seem to be, at least.
>> You know, there is a lot of
aid still at the border that needs to get in.
[6:12:47 AM]
needs to get in. Of course, we are still
talking about hostages that the U.S. And
Israel are quite involved in trying to get
released. But there is also what seems to
be a public split that's forming between the
U.S. And Israel. That how you see it? Because
you have Netanyahu who is saying there will
not be any kind of ceasefire or a pause until
all hostages are released. But then you also
have the secretary of state blinken publicly
stating there needs to be a humanitarian pause.
>> Yeah, the secretary of state is trying to very
much bridge the gap between the dezur for
a complete ceasefire and Israel's public
stance at least on the issue of either a
ceasefire or humanitarian pause. In fact,
they are doing some humanitarian pauses
like the one that's in existence right now,
but the fact of the matter is that Israel has
its war aims and it believes it can't be seen to
[6:13:49 AM]
it believes it can't be seen to be deviating from
them, and they think this kind of a humanitarian
pause may be a slight deviation or a large
deviation in their minds, perhaps R from their war
aims. So the secretary has a bit of a problem here
in the effort to kind of bridge that that gap.
It's a difficult needle to thread in this case.
>> What is your sense of what is happening on
the ground? Last we heard Friday is that
Israel encircled gaza city. What happens next?
>> Yeah, so I'm not sure that the encirclement
has been completed but may have been by this time.
You know, the encirclement is designed to besiege
or starve out the hamas fighters. When they do
that and we see the map of gaza right there,
gaza city in particular, that's in the center of
the gaza strip. And the idea there is not only to
encircle that area, but also to make it possible
for Israeli ground forces to enter a certain
[6:14:52 AM]
ground forces to enter a certain zone within
that city and then be able to go in and,
in essence, clear that zone. That's going
to be difficult for the Israelis to do. I
think that might be the next step,
but they have to watch the tunnels,
they are going to have to make sure that they
don't get ambushed and, you know, also watch for
improvised explosive devices. So those are the
kinds of challenges that they have right now.
>> Yeah, a lot of risks
going in there on the ground.